on into the afternoon,
there may be a wee bit of hail mixed
in and getting quite gusty as well.
Highs of round about 10 or 11.
On into the weekend it is much
colder by day and by night,
but at least it is dry and bright.
Ben Rich has the nationalforecast.
Good evening. After all the rough
weather, the wet and windy weather
we’ve had this week, you’ll be
pleased to hear it’s about to calm
pleased to hear it’s about to ﬁlm
but not just
pleased to hear it’s about to calm
but not just yet.
but notjust yet. This stripe of
but not just yet. This stripe of
cloud is
but notjust yet. This stripe of
cloud is bringing rain eastwards at
the moment. This hook in the cloud
here is the focus for a swathes of
severe gates
severe gales moving across the far
north—west of Scotland through
north-west of Scotland through
tonight. The
north—west of Scotland through
tonight. The main band of rain will
clear the south—east of England by
tomorrow morning and then tomorrow
is a day of sunshine and showers,
but some of the showers through the
Midlands, Wales and southern England
Midlands, Walas and southern England
will be heavy
Midlands, Wales and southern England
will be heavy with hail and thunder.
Some of the showers across Scotland
will be wintering over high ground
and it stays windy and the far north
of Scotland. Turning colder in the
north-west,
north—west, highs of 7—11. In the
north-west, highs of 7-11. In the
weekend things
north—west, highs of 7—11. In the
weekend things calm down, drier,
calmer weather but with some
overnight frosts. The areas of low
pressure that have been dominant
recently are going to get muscled
out of the way by this growing
powerful area of high pressure
building its way in, suppressing all
the unsettled weather, giving us
lots of dry conditions. Still some
showers in Scotland on Saturday.
Some of which will be wintry, still
wintry in the North of Scotland but
lighter winds further south, quite a
lot of sunshine so despite
temperatures looking a bit lower it
might feel quite pleasant if you get
yourself out of the breeze and into
some sunshine. A cold night
If I could give my younger self
any advice, it would be...
Be the best version of you
that you can be.
Embrace it.
It’s that element
of stepping yourself up.
I mean, I love it.
I’ve got to love every part of me.
HE WHISTLES
If you want to stand out,
just be you.
# Gotta get up, you gotta get up
# Gotta get up,
you gotta get up... #
I just think you’re inspiring.
This year, do it your way.
Tonight, we are in Liverpool, and
welcome to Question Time. On the
panel, Helen Whately, the
government’s Culture Minister, until
recently deputy chair of the
Conservatives, Labour Shadow
Conservatives, labour Shadow
Attorney
Conservatives, Labour Shadow
Attorney General in England and
Wales, Labour peer and mineral
Wales, labour peer and mineral
jeremy
Wales, Labour peer and mineral
Jeremy Corbyn’s in a circle, Shami
jeremy Corbyn’s in a cirda, Shami
Chakrabarti,
Jeremy Corbyn’s in a circle, Shami
Chakrabarti, Alyn Smith, MP for 15
years and Europe spokesperson at
Westminster for the SNP, Madeline
Grant, journalist and assistant
comment editor at the Telegraph, an
actor and musician best known for
his leading rola
his leading role as DC Hathaway in
his leading rola as DC Hathaway in
the
his leading role as DC Hathaway in
the detective drama Lewis, Laurence
Fox.
Welcome to our panel, to you at home
and, of course, our
and, of course, ouraudience
Welcome to our panel, to you at home
and, of course, our audience here as
usual. Our
usual. Ouraudience
and, of course, our audience here as
usual. Our audience has been
selected to reflect the current
selected to reﬂect the current
political
selected to reflect the current
political picture, depending where
we are, so in England there are more
Conservatives than Labour, plus a
Conservatives than labour, plus a
smaller
Conservatives than Labour, plus a
smaller number from other parties,
and I look forward to hearing from
all of you. You can argue along and
all of you. You ran argue along and
join in the
all of you. You can argue along and
join in the conversation on social
media at BBC Question Time. Let’s
have our
have ourfirst question
media at BBC Question Time. Let’s
have our first question from Tom
Stevenson.
Stevenson. With reducing passenger
Stevenson. with reducing passenger
duty only
Stevenson. With reducing passenger
duty only lead to more domestic
ﬂights and
flights and worsen the climate
ﬂights and worsen the climate
crisis?
flights and worsen the climate
crisis? Flybe has been in the news,
and it’s not entirely clear what the
government is doing to help that
ailing regional airline. What are
ailing regionalairtine. what are
you doing?
ailing regional airline. What are
you doing? Will you reduce air
you doing? will you reduce air
passenger
you doing? Will you reduce air
passenger duty to help them out? The
top line, and the thing that I
welcome as a government minister,
with particular responsibility for
tourism, is that Flybe will keep
ﬂying, and
flying, and that is really good
ﬂying, and that is really good
news,
flying, and that is really good
news, because they operate over a
third of domestic flights in the UK
third of domestic ﬂights in the UK
and
third of domestic flights in the UK
and connect parts of the UK, places
"TY
very hard to get to by any other
means, so
means, sol
very hard to get to by any other
means, so I think it’s a good thing
that Flybe will keep flying. I can’t
that Flybe will keep ﬂying. I can’t
go into the
that Flybe will keep flying. I can’t
go into the detail of what may or
may not have been agreed with Flybe.
Should expect a reduction in air
passenger duty? The government will
review it, and they will want to
make sure that parts of the UK
continue to be connected and
recognise the role of flying is part
recognise the role of ﬂying is part
of that.
recognise the role of flying is part
of that. It sounds like you are
softening it up for a reduction.
Wouldn’t want to speculate on the
outcome of any review, and we do
that hand in aware of our ambitions
on climate change and our commitment
to go zero carbon in 2050, which
needs to happen hand—in—hand with
needs to happen hand-in-hand with
people being
needs to happen hand—in—hand with
people being able to get about the
UK. Do you think helping a company
like Flybe, which a lot of
like Flybe, which a lot ofjobs, is
commence you at with helping to
resolve the climate crisis, and we
heard David Attenborough talking
heard David Athenborough talking
today
heard David Attenborough talking
today about where the climate crisis
is? I
is? Ithink
today about where the climate crisis
is? I think people will probably do
is? I think peopla will probably do
what is
is? I think people will probably do
what is cheapest, and it depends
whether flying or the train
whetherﬂying or the train is
whether ﬂying or the train is
cheaper,
whetherﬂying or the train is
cheaper, and, you know, I
cheaper, and, you know, lam not so
against ﬂying,
against flying, sorry. Is an actor,
against ﬂying, sorry. Is an actor,
you have to ﬂy
against flying, sorry. Is an actor,
you have to fly all over the place.
you have to ﬂy all over the place.
Yeah, my
you have to fly all over the place.
Yeah, my carbon footprint is huge,
but we make up for it by preaching
to everybody how they should change
their lives.
APPLAUSE
APPMUSE
I
APPLAUSE
I think there was a lot in what the
minister said about people flying to
minister said about peopla ﬂying to
places that
minister said about people flying to
places that are very hard to reach
by any other means. Why? It seems to
by any other means. why? It seems to
me it is
by any other means. Why? It seems to
me it is often too cheap to fly
me it is often too cheap to ﬂy
within
me it is often too cheap to fly
within this relatively small
country, and too expensive to get
the train.
APPLAUSE
A round trip from Exeter to
Manchester, Flybe, £68, this is on a
particular day, and by rail, £141.
It’s so much cheaper to fly. That’s
It’s so much cheaper to ﬂy. That’s
a problam, and I
It’s so much cheaper to fly. That’s
a problem, and I understand it must
a problam, and I understand it must
be very difficult
a problem, and I understand it must
be very difficult in government when
people are going to lose their
people are going to lose theirjobs,
peopla are going to lose theirjobs,
and no
people are going to lose theirjobs,
and no doubt your review will
involve consulting the trade unions
and people who stand to lose their
and peopla who stand to lose their
jobs but, in
and people who stand to lose their
jobs but, in the end, as David
Attenborough said in his interview,
Athenborough said in his interview,
this is an
Attenborough said in his interview,
this is an emergency and this is
now. We need to take urgent action.
APPLAUSE
And that means not cutting air
passenger duty but investing, and
yes, people need jobs, and people
need to travel, but we need to
invest in jobs
invest injobs in a green
revolution, and the travel should be
by train, not flying short distances
by train, not ﬂying short distances
within
by train, not flying short distances
within these islands. You can’t get
to the Scilly Isles by train, so
that’s an example, and it’s hard to
get there by other means. That’s
what I meant by there being some
places that are hard to get to, but
I agree, absolutely we want to be
investing in other forms of public
transport and rail, as I hope people
transport and rail, as I hope peopla
know, is a very
transport and rail, as I hope people
know, is a very high priority, and
Northern Powerhouse Rail, linking
cities in the north, is galloping in
Liverpool. But when? We are running
Liverpool. But when? We are mnning
out of time.
Liverpool. But when? We are running
out of time. The man in the purple
out of time. The man in the purpla
top. I
top. Ithink
out of time. The man in the purple
top. I think there are several
points we need to take on board. One
is the need to decide what camp we
is the need to decide what ramp we
are going to be
is the need to decide what camp we
are going to be in, whether we are
going to bail them out or we are not
going to support them. We bailed at
the banks but we didn’t bail out
the banks but we didn’t bailout
Thomas
the banks but we didn’t bail out
Thomas Cook. 50 there is an issue.
Thomas Cook. So there is an issue.
You are right about
Thomas Cook. 50 there is an issue.
You are right aboutjobs, and we
also need to think about how we are
going to protect the environment, so
it’s all together in the package,
and we need to decide which camp we
and we need to decide which ramp we
are going to be in
and we need to decide which camp we
are going to be in as a and a
government. What do you think? —— is
government. what do you think? -- is
a country and a
government. What do you think? —— is
a country and a government. I am
with the actor. 0h, with Lawrence!
just brief, that’s
Just brief, that’s the way to do it.
just brief, that’s the way to do it.
The man at
Just brief, that’s the way to do it.
The man at the back with the
glasses. Is the issue goes further
than just reducing climate change
and tackling the problems airlines
and tackling the problams aidines
are facing.
and tackling the problems airlines
are facing. Flybe is a company which
is focusing on small demand routes,
on short—haul routes as well, with
on short-haul routes as well, with
have just which
on short—haul routes as well, with
have just which have business and
demand from the poorest areas of
society. Flybe is operating a
business model where it charges half
the price of other modes of
transport, and this has been hit at
double tax rate because it flies
double tax rate because it ﬂies
internally.
double tax rate because it flies
internally. This money is supposed
to be spent on reducing climate
change, but we are opening a third
mnway at
runway at Heathrow with the same
amount of funds we are taking in
from tax, which is supposed to
reduce climate change. But policy is
hypocritical and they need to either
support the airlines and bail them
support the airtines and bail them
out or
support the airlines and bail them
out or actually help the climate. We
can’t play both sides of the
argument here. Yes, the woman there.
Is part of the younger generation, I
find it insulting that our futures
are being putting behind bailing out
plain companies when our government
ran’t
can’t even make climate change a
priority, they can’t fund any steps
towards it, so why are we letting
aeroplane companies stay put? Do you
think you would feel like that if
you worked for that company? It’s a
difficult issue with employment, but
we need to put in steps and have
other employment which relies on
more renewable sources, and we need
to stop relying on fossil fuels as
much for employment.
APPLAUSE
APPMUSE
I
APPLAUSE
I am confused about what it is the
government is trying to achieve
because, on the one hand, their
justification is that they are keen
to rebalance the regions and
demonstrate to them, their voter
base, that they mean to level up the
economy, but at the same time this
step has taken the effect of putting
a lot of money into which peoples
a lot of money into which peoplas
pockets,
a lot of money into which peoples
pockets, because the consortium
which owns Flybe, you know, it is
part of one of the biggest
beneficiaries will be Virgin, Delta,
Richard Branson. Are we saying none
of these people might have stepped
in to make up the air passenger duty
that was overdue? I don’t see why it
necessarily had to come from the
pub“:
public purse.
APPLAUSE
The other thing that is deeply
inconsistent is how on earth this
squares with the government’s
environmental aims of reaching zero
carbon by 2050 and, to be fair, I
don’t think this is just the
Conservatives, and I have no doubt
that if jeremy
that ifJeremy Corbyn were Prime
Minister he would also be bailing
out Flybe while trying to push for
out Flybe whila trying to push for
zero
out Flybe while trying to push for
zero carbon by 2030. You have a
completely contradictory set of
environmental policies where, on the
one hand, you prop up airlines, but
one hand, you prop up airtines, but
you also impose
one hand, you prop up airlines, but
you also impose heavy fuel duty is
such that thousands of pensioners
stmggle to
struggle to heat their homes, and at
the same time we hear a lot of
preaching about the environment but
very little discussion of specifics.
very little discussion of specific.
Bleating
very little discussion of specifics.
Bleating about the environment? Do
you think David Attenborough was
you think David Athenborough was
bleating
you think David Attenborough was
bleating today? if politicians don’t
talk about specifics, that’s my
talk about specific, that’s my
problem. I
talk about specifics, that’s my
problem. I would
problem. Iwould prefer a politician
who said, here is my plan for the
environment, I will spend 2% of GDP
environment, I will spend 296 of GDP
buying up
environment, I will spend 2% of GDP
buying up farmland to plant trees. I
would prefer that to the current
system, which is to rush in an
extreme Italy --
extreme Italy —— extremely
extreme Italy -- extremely
far-reaching
extreme Italy —— extremely
far—reaching target which will have
far-reaching target which will have
big effects
far—reaching target which will have
big effects and then leave it for
future politicians to sort out
rather than having any indication of
how to get there. Alyn Smith, when
it comes to the Scottish company,
and I should mention that sets’s
owners, they are putting in 30
million, so they are not putting
nothing in. When it comes to the
nothing in. when it comes to the
Scottish
nothing in. When it comes to the
Scottish Government, you wanted to
reduce air passenger duty by 50% but
reduce air passenger duty by 5096 but
then you wrote
reduce air passenger duty by 50% but
then you wrote back on it, so what
is your view on helping out a
company like Flybe? The Scottish
Government was the first country to
declare a climate emergency, we are
on track to be carbon neutral by
2040. Plan, but you wanted to reduce
departure tax. That is a former
policy. We are in a climate
emergency. You wrote back on it,
there are enough. We need action,
and the UK policy on which is why we
are wondering what the policy is.
Mynach was allowed to go bust, but
we are trying to find ways of
helping Flybe. Flybe operates
ﬂights
flights line —— lifeline services to
ﬂights line -- lifeline services to
some
flights line —— lifeline services to
some islands, so this is serious,
but we are implementing a climate
but we are implamenting a climate
change policy
but we are implementing a climate
change policy and doing well with
that, but there are needs, as Shami
says, there are decades of
underinvestment in proper,
sustainable public transport, and we
need to change the game and stop the
point-scoring,
point—scoring, get together and get
point-scoring, get together and get
real,
point—scoring, get together and get
real, because this is an emergency
right now and what is happening is
real. Should we stop some short—haul
real. Should we stop some short-haul
ﬂights?
real. Should we stop some short—haul
flights? Research discourage people
ﬂights? Research discourage people
from
flights? Research discourage people
from them, but I’d like as little as
I ran.
Iran. --
from them, but I’d like as little as
I ran. -- we
I can. —— we should discourage. Hay
I ran. -- we should discourage. Hay
fever season
I can. —— we should discourage. Hay
fever season has started in
Stockholm right now, today. The
cherry blossom is already out there,
in january. If we
inJanuary. If we think climate
in january. If we think climate
change is far
inJanuary. If we think climate
change is far away and for
Indonesian islands and Australian
bushfires, it’s in our communities
right now. Scottish farmers have
been seeing all sorts of
implications that we need to get
really serious. We want to maintain
lifeline services, but we need to be
clear about moving away from carbon
to a sustainable economy, and
Scotland is doing well with that.
Come and see our ideas. Cue the man
at the back. The 2058 is wholly
inadequate for a developed country
like the British Isles. It zero in
like the British Islas. It zero in
2050, that
like the British Isles. It zero in
2050, that date was mentioned in the
international panel on climate
change report is the global net zero
carbon, to not exceed 1.5 degrees
Celsius in global warming, above
which would be catastrophic. We are
already going to suffer from serious
consequences. Above that, even
worse, tens to hundreds of millions
of people displaced. The 2050 date
of peopla displaced. The 2050 date
is an
of people displaced. The 2050 date
is an absolute copout for this
country. We are a developed country
and should be leading the way. It
should be brought forward. I
should be brought forward. Ifind it
quite ironic that the SNP are saying
that the carbon neutral thing is
important, which it is, but isn’t
Nicola Sturgeon’s main budget plan,
if they get independence, coming
from oil, which is a fossil
from oil, which is a fossilfuel
from oil, which is a fossil fuel
used to
from oil, which is a fossilfuel
used to pollute things? Maybe, if
the SNP want to get independence,
she has to start looking at other
“75
ways of forming the economy, rather
than relying on fossil
than relying on fossilfuels, which
than relying on fossil fuels, which
are killing the
than relying on fossilfuels, which
are killing the planet? That is what
we are doing, investing massively in
renewables. Scotland has the energy
jackpot, we have got renewals, wind,
wave, biomass, water
wave, biomass, waterfalling from
wave, biomass, water falling from
the sky
wave, biomass, waterfalling from
the sky regularly, and all sorts of
the sky regularty, and all sorts of
stuff we
the sky regularly, and all sorts of
stuff we are exporting, and you are
right, we need to decarbonise the
right, we need to dearbonise the
economy and
right, we need to decarbonise the
economy and we have a plan to do
that. That is very much part of
Scottish economy. Ellen, let me come
Scottish economy. Ellan, let me come
back to give
Scottish economy. Ellen, let me come
back to give the let’s remind
ourselves what David Attenborough
ourselves what David Athenborough
said today,
ourselves what David Attenborough
said today, as well as now is the
moment of climate crisis, he said,
this is urgent, we know how to solve
it but we refuse to take steps we
know have to be taken, so you
represent the government which has
been in power
been in powerfor ten years
represent the government which has
been in power for ten years and you
refuse to take the steps which have
to be taken.
Since 2015, our greenhouse gas
emissions have been reduced by 25%,
emissions have been reduced by 2596,
while the
emissions have been reduced by 25%,
while the economy has been growing.
Obviously that is not including
aviation, shipping, which people are
aviation, shipping, which peopla are
keen on
aviation, shipping, which people are
keen on pointing out. Just in terms
keen on pointing out. just in terms
of what
keen on pointing out. Just in terms
of what the figure actually means.
We are making huge on switching from
fossil fuels to having a significant
part of our energy from renewables.
part of our energy from renewablas.
And
part of our energy from renewables.
And we have got huge, ambitious
plans. The gentleman up there said
2050 is not soon enough. Absolutely,
I am totally alive and worried
myself to the climate change crisis.
Do you think it is not soon enough
as well? Well, we are the first
major economy to even be setting an
ambition of 2050. Let’s realise that
that is quite a substantial
ambition, to be leading the world on
that. To the gentleman who suggested
we should choose a camp, I don’t
we should choose a ramp, I don’t
think we
we should choose a camp, I don’t
think we should choose a camp, I
think we should choose a ramp, I
think we
think we should choose a camp, I
think we should do both. So, we
should continue to aim for growth,
we should be ambitious about growth
and Green growth and we should
achieve growth hand—in—hand with
achieve growth hand-in-hand with
making sure
achieve growth hand—in—hand with
making sure that we reduce our
emissions, we go carbon neutral by
2050 and we leave the environment in
a better state than it was when we
inherited it. I
inherited it. lam
a better state than it was when we
inherited it. I am going to take
another question, before I do, I
just want to tell you that we will
be in Stoke Newington in London next
week and the week after that, we
will be in Buxton, so if you would
like to be in the audience, call
like to be in the audience, callus
like to be in the audience, all us
on... Or you ran go
like to be in the audience, callus
on... Or you can go to the Question
on... Or you ran go to the Question
Time
on... Or you can go to the Question
Time website and follow the
instructions there. Let’s take our
instmctions there. Let’s take our
second
instructions there. Let’s take our
second question.
second question. Should the Sussexes
profit from their royal status? Is
that what you think they may end up
doing? I
doing? Ithink
that what you think they may end up
doing? I think most likely it is
what they may end up doing, to be
honest. We have already seen them
trademark their Sussex name, and I
think it is highly unlikely that
they will not continue to carry on
this trend. Laurence Fox, what is
your view on it all? I feel sorry
for them, in a way. Because it is
difficult when you’ve got a new baby
and all of that, and it is hard, but
I
Ijust have
and all of that, and it is hard, but
I just have this feeling,
Ijust have this feeling, surely
Harry must have had a chat to Meghan
at some point and said, by the way,
darting, this is
darling, this is going to be misery,
darting, this is going to be misery,
and you don’t
darling, this is going to be misery,
and you don’t have to marry me if
you don’t want to. Maybe they did!
May be they did, and then, you want
to hop out, it is, like, can we have
to hop out, it is, like, ran we have
the
the cottage back and your HRHs? So,
you think
the cottage hack and your HRHs? So,
you think they
the cottage back and your HRHs? So,
you think they are doing the wrong
thing, you think it is
disrespectful? I think it is really
unfair, because we’ve got the Queen,
who is an extremely different ball
game, she is duty ahead of
everything else, and when you’re
younger, you do want to make a life
or your family, so
or yourfamily, sol
younger, you do want to make a life
or yourfamily, so I do emphasise
or your family, so I do emphasise
with them,
or yourfamily, so I do emphasise
with them, but I do think there is a
little bit of having cake and eating
little bit of having rake and eating
it, which I
little bit of having cake and eating
it, which I don’t enjoy. The problem
we’ve got with this is that Meghan
has agreed to be Harry’s wife and
has agreed to be Harrrs wife and
then the
has agreed to be Harry’s wife and
then the press have torn her to
pieces. That’s what they did. Let’s
be really clear about what this is,
let’s all
let’s call it
be really clear about what this is,
let’s all it by
let’s call it by its name, it’s
let’s all it by its name, it’s
racism.
let’s call it by its name, it’s
racism. She is a black woman and
she’s been in... It’s not racism,
you can’t... She has been torn to
pieces. No, it’s not. We are the
most tolerant, lovely country in
Europe. It is so easy to throw the
card of racism at everybody and it
is getting boring. You are a white
privileged male who has... Can I
privileged male who has... (“an I
just...? I
just...? Iran’t
privileged male who has... Can I
just...? I can’t help what I am, I
was born like this, it is an
immutable characteristic, so to call
me a white privileged male is to be
racist. You’re being racist. I am
racist. You’re being racist. lam
not taking a
racist. You’re being racist. I am
not taking a view either way, I will
just add in that Priti Patel, the
Home Secretary, also took the view
that it was not racism, I am not
making a judgment on that. The woman
in the red top, you were nodding
your head vigourously, what have you
got to say? I think when Meghan
first married Harry, I thought it
first married Harry, Ithought it
was a
first married Harry, I thought it
was a breath of fresh air, I thought
it was good. I thought it was nice
to have somebody like her, who was
not a royal, she came from America,
she came from an ordinary
background, I thought that was all
great. But I think that she’s
actually
actuallyjoined a club and now she
actually joined a club and now she
just doesn’t
actuallyjoined a club and now she
just doesn’t the rules. And she
just doesn’t the mles. And she
wants to opt
just doesn’t the rules. And she
wants to opt out. And as Laurence
said, I
said, Ithink
wants to opt out. And as Laurence
said, I think surely she must have
realised... She is an intelligent
woman, she must have realised some
of what was going to happen. But it
might be Harry who is driving this?
It might be but it seems to be that
it is Meghan, I don’t know. We can
it is Meghan, I don’t know. We ran
only speak you
it is Meghan, I don’t know. We can
only speak you late. What is your
only speak you late. what is your
take on this,
only speak you late. What is your
take on this, Shami? I think you’ve
got to walk around in someone else’s
shoes. I know that to be royalty is
not to be the worst off person in
the country or the planet but I
still try to walk around in someone
else’s shoes and I do think that
some of the things that are being
said are pretty harsh, and I would
never say that because you’re a
white man, you don’t have a
perspective, but I would ask you to
consider the perspective of anybody
who has had a different experience.
And I know that Britain is a
wonderful country, and I am second
to no one in my love of my country,
but loving your country doesn’t mean
that you say there is no racism in
the country. And there are no issues
in the press. Forgive me... I think
in this city perhaps more than
anywhere else in this country, you
know about abuses by parts of the
press, and I...
press, and I... And if we want to be
press, and I... And ifwe wantto be
specific and look
press, and I... And if we want to be
specific and look at evidence, there
was a piece I think it was in
Buzzfeed today, where there was a
Bunfeed today, where there was a
very, very
Buzzfeed today, where there was a
very, very forensic comparison
between the treatment of the two
princes... Shall I quote? This is
the Daily Express, so, the Daily
Express is talking about Kate
choosing flowers and in August they
choosing ﬂowers and in August they
said, in
choosing flowers and in August they
said, in 2011, this was for the
wedding, the bride herself, the
bouquet, was effortlessly elegant
bouquet, was eﬂorﬂassly elagant
and
bouquet, was effortlessly elegant
and understated. Then the Daily
Express on Meghan choosing flowers
Express on Meghan choosing ﬂowers
for her
Express on Meghan choosing flowers
for her wedding, how Meghan Markle’s
ﬂowers might
flowers might have put Princess
ﬂowers might have put Princess
Margaret’s
flowers might have put Princess
Margaret’s life at risk. I am not
saying that represent the Daily
Express’s perspective. And it
Express’s perspective. And it goes
on and it goes
on and it goes on and one is
touching their bump to much,
avocados are good, and avocados
are... It is so forensically done.
are... It is so forensic-ally done.
And it’s not just
are... It is so forensically done.
And it’s notjust the press. I am
And it’s not just the press. I am
not on
And it’s notjust the press. I am
not on social media because I am a
dinosaur, but also I am not on it
because some of it is so awful. And
forgive me, I do think that the
Duchess of Sussex has had some
really rough treatment. The question
was, is it right that they should
profit from their royal status of?
profit from their royal stems of?
It’s
profit from their royal status of?
It’s tricky, isn’t it, because we
can’t have it both ways. If we say
we want a slimmed down Royal Family,
we want to spend less public money
on people who are not in the direct
on peopla who are not in the direct
line of
on people who are not in the direct
line of succession, et cetera, you
ran say that on
can say that on the one hand, and
ran say that on the one hand, and
then you say
can say that on the one hand, and
then you say they should not
profit. . .
profit... Prince Harry cannot escape
his birth and his status, and part
of that is a very, very tragic story
about losing your mother when you’re
too young, I have some sympathy for
that, I have some empathy for that
and I think we should just tone it
down a little bit did you want to
come back in? Yeah, I think it is
come back in? Yeah, Ithink it is
one of the
come back in? Yeah, I think it is
one of the dangerous things about
throwing racism around in this
country, which we are doing a lot at
the moment, is, people become so
the moment, is, peopla become so
conscious
the moment, is, people become so
conscious of it that things like the
Manchester grooming scandal get
ignored. So that we need to be
careful that we need to call out
careful that we need to all out
racism
careful that we need to call out
racism when it is seen and when it
is obvious and we should stand
together to condemn it but for fear
of sounding racist, there has been
horrific things have happened in
Manchester and in towns all over the
north of England and we should be
careful and use racism when it is
there an obvious and not call
someone racist
someone racistjust because they
someone racist just because they
don’t agree
someone racistjust because they
don’t agree with you. So, coming
back to the question, when this
story broke, Wednesday a week ago, I
don’t think any of us could have
foreseen how it was going to go, we
have now obviously got the Daily
Mail and the Mail on Sunday possibly
falling
calling Meghan Markle’s father, the
falling Meghan Markle’s father, the
court case,
calling Meghan Markle’s father, the
court case, the libel case, what is
court rase, the libel rase, what is
your view on
court case, the libel case, what is
your view on what is happening? I
think it makes the UK look like it
has lost its marbles, forgive me. I
really struggle, with all of the
really stmggle, with all of the
issues
really struggle, with all of the
issues that are kicking about in the
world, to find any headspace for
this whatsoever. I think the Royal
Family has been... The press
alternates with the Royals between
complete sycophancy or sheer hatred.
And we have seen it over the years
with each member of the Royal
Family. But there is an issue with
pub“:
public spending, it is not entirely
frivolous. Security and what have
you. Of all the issues facing us, I
don’t think this is the biggest one.
If they want to be private citizens,
good luck to them, I wish them well.
If they absolutely give up their
right to public money when that
happens, absolutely. But this isn’t
the issue we need to be talking
about. Well, lots of people want to
about. Well, lots of peopla want to
talk
about. Well, lots of people want to
talk about it, and that is why we
are doing it. Lots of people want to
are doing it. Lots of peopla want to
talk
are doing it. Lots of people want to
talk about celebrity Love Island,
that doesn’t mean it’s important.
Not in this room I am glad to say.
The racism is a bit more serious,
the idea that there is no racism in
Britain is a serious issue. No one
said there is no racism. No doubt
there has been a great deal of
racism directed against Meghan
Markle from members of the public
and some sections of the press. But
I think in general, what is really
aggravating people isn’t the colour
aggravating peopla isn’t the colour
of her
aggravating people isn’t the colour
of her skin but it is the hypocrisy
that they have shown on many
occasions, even the way in which
they want to exit the Royal Family
is, they are not proposing to be,
like, the Dutch Royal Family, where
you cycle to work and maintain a
regular
regularjob. What they
you cycle to work and maintain a
regular job. What they are
regularjob. What they are proposing
regularjob. what they are proposing
is a strange
regularjob. What they are proposing
is a strange hybrid where you retain
many of the perks and privileges of
being in the Royal Family, but you
expect none of their duty. And to go
back to the original question about,
are we going to see them cashing in
on their browned? Yes, I think we
will. -- on
will. —— on their brand? I think we
will. -- on their brand? I think we
are going to get a
will. —— on their brand? I think we
are going to get a kind of woke
celebrity, bit of Kardashian thrown
in for good measure, type thing. You
have painted an extraordinary
vision! They say they want to avoid
press coverage but I think what they
are hoping to achieve with this
brand is to exchange UK coverage for
US coverage. I think the public
empathises with their need to live a
more private life, and there are
days out of the Royal Family which
would enable them to do that, but
would enabla them to do that, but
what therre
would enable them to do that, but
what they’re proposing is not a
what therre proposing is not a
retreat
what they’re proposing is not a
retreat from public life at all, I
think the hypocrisy in that is
really annoying a lot of people.
really annoying a lot of peopla.
Fergie got
really annoying a lot of people.
Fergie got ten times worse press
than Meghan has ever had. And as
soon the press say boo to Meghan, I
feel she pulls the racist card. I
am, as she says, a woman of colour,
and I feel she
and Ifeel she pulls the racist card
and I feel she pulls the racist card
every time,
and Ifeel she pulls the racist card
every time, when there is something
she doesn’t like, she is straight
off with, it is racist. I’m not sure
she personally has ever said that,
but other people have said that for
but other peopla have said that for
her. And Harry
but other people have said that for
her. And Harry has mentioned it, I
think. I
think. Ifeel as if they
her. And Harry has mentioned it, I
think. I feel as if they seem
think. Ifeel as if they seem rather
naive to me, and they have got their
priorities all... They talk
priorities all. .. They talk about
priorities all... They talk about
being family
priorities all. .. They talk about
being family orientated...
being family orientated... But they
seem to be... I know they’re
seem to be... I know therre
vulnerabla,
seem to be... I know they’re
vulnerable, but their priorities,
they didn’t even tell the Queen, and
they told, did they tell the media?
They just seem to
Theyjust seem to me a couple who
They just seem to me a couple who
are quite naive.
Theyjust seem to me a couple who
are quite naive. Just priorities,
are quite naive. just priorities,
why didn’t
are quite naive. Just priorities,
why didn’t they tell the Queen? You
tell your family first. They go on
about their
about theirfamily, their
tell your family first. They go on
about their family, their child and
everything. Obviously, we don’t know
if they didn’t tell the Queen or
not, we are all circulating. Because
we never fall out without families,
right? Never! Let me hear
right? Never! Let me hearfrom
right? Never! Let me hear from
Helen.
right? Never! Let me hearfrom
Helen. Where there are questions of
Helen. where there are questions of
racism, let’s just
Helen. Where there are questions of
racism, let’s just continue to put
their message out there that it is
not acceptable in our society, we
won’t tolerate it and we shouldn’t
tolerate it from members of the
Royal Family. Do you think there is
racism? I’m sure that Meghan, like
others, have experienced racism. I
haven’t seen the analysis that you
went into, but let’s... What about
went into, but lat’s... what about
the original
went into, but let’s... What about
the original question, should they
profit from their royal status? To
profit from their royal stems? To
come
profit from their royal status? To
come back to the overall point,
being a member of the Royal Family,
there is dearty
there is clearly great material
there is dearty great material
benefits,
there is clearly great material
benefits, but it must be tough
living your entire life in the
pub“:
public eye. I can’t imagine... 0K,
living your entire life in the
public eye. I can’t imagine... OK, I
public eye. Iran’t imagine... OK, I
am
public eye. I can’t imagine... OK, I
am sometimes in the public eye but
not that much of my life is in the
pub“:
public eye, I think it must be
really tough, and a huge number of
duties associated with it and you
don’t get to make all your own
choices and I have huge respect for
the Royal Family, huge respect for
the Queen, and it is a shame that
this is being played out so publicly
but I hope they will be able to come
to a conclusion and move on, and
Azman fix said, there is lots of
other stuff that we be focusing on.
m:
We have spent ten minutes talking
about a family of multimillionaires
who exist on state subsidies
benefit. Can we move on to something
benefit. (“an we move on to something
more important,
benefit. Can we move on to something
more important, please?
APPLAUSE
Well, the only reason we asked the
question was because so many from
the audience wanted to discuss it,
but I was about to move on. Shall we
do that? We are simply reflecting
do that? We are simply reﬂacting
the
do that? We are simply reflecting
the questions put to us. This is how
it works. Lucy O’Brien, let’s hear
from you. Considering Boris
johnson’s
Johnson’s comments about Liverpool
johnson’s comments about Liverpool
and its
Johnson’s comments about Liverpool
and its overwhelming support for
labour,
Labour, what can we now expect from
labour, what ran we now expect from
the Tory
Labour, what can we now expect from
the Tory government?
APPLAUSE
Lucy, when you talk about Boris
johnson’s
Johnson’s comments about Liverpool,
johnson’s comments about Liverpool,
are you referring
Johnson’s comments about Liverpool,
are you referring to the editorial
which was in the Spectator in 200A?
which was in the Spectator in 2004?
Yes. It
which was in the Spectator in 200A?
Yes. It was pretty roundly insulting
about Liverpool, and I will pick up
a quote for those not familiar, he
was the editor, he will not
necessarily have written it himself,
but he edited the publication, at
one quote, they see themselves, that
is Liverpudlians, whenever possible
as victims and they resent their
victim status yet, at the same time,
they wallow in it, and he also made
insulting references to Hillsborough
as well. So, you want to kick us
off.
off, Shami Chakrabarti? Liverpool
boss overwhelming support for
labour, so
Labour, so what can we expect from a
labour, so what ran we expect from a
Tory government?
Labour, so what can we expect from a
Tory government? Well, it depends
whether you believe in this
redemption that we are now going to
see, because the red wall was
shattered and we are now going to
see a one—nation Conservative
see a one-nation Conservative
government,
see a one—nation Conservative
government, led by Boris
government, led by Borisjohnson,
government, lad by Boris johnson,
and
government, led by Boris johnson,
and he is going
government, led by Borisjohnson,
and he is going to govern for the
people that voted against him as
peopla that voted against him as
well as
people that voted against him as
well as the people that voted for
well as the peopla that voted for
him.
well as the people that voted for
him. That is one narrative that he
has been keen to put out there since
the election. If he was able to live
“P
up to that promise, clearly a lot of
up to that promise, dearty a lot of
peopla would
up to that promise, clearly a lot of
people would be very glad to see
peopla would be very glad to see
that. I
people would be very glad to see
that. I am worried, however,
that. lam worried, however, that
there is this other message which is
much more aggressive, much more
arrogant, much more entitled. We
have seen a little bit of it already
with this idea that the judges are
going to be punished for
going to be punished forfinding
going to be punished for finding
against
going to be punished forfinding
against Boris
against BorisJohnson last autumn,
against Boris johnson last autumn,
when he
against BorisJohnson last autumn,
when he shut
when he shutdown government, and
when he shut down government, and
there are suggestions that a
judicial review, which is the way
that citizens can hold the
government to the law, which will be
interfered with. I am just worried
that, time and again with Mr
johnson,
Johnson, nasty
that, time and again with Mr
Johnson, nastyJohnson wins the day
johnson, nasty johnson wins the day
over nice
Johnson, nastyJohnson wins the day
over nicejohnson and, yes, I know
over nice johnson and, yes, I know
that he did
over nicejohnson and, yes, I know
that he did apologise, he was made
to apologise for his Liverpool
remarks some years ago, but it’s not
just the people of Liverpool that
just the peopla of Liverpool that
have
just the people of Liverpool that
have been insulted. There was a long
line of people. We would say, I was
line of peopla. We would say, I was
a journalist then
line of people. We would say, I was
a journalist then so that’s OK, but
I doubt Madeline would get the same
license if she wrote about women
looking like letterboxes, etc.
APPLAUSE
In terms of what can we
In terms of what ran we expect from
a Tory
In terms of what can we expect from
a Tory government, Madeline I think
the evidence suggests they are going
in a more economically venturing
direction that we have seen before
from Conservatives. They have
realised that many of the voters in
the north who voted for them put
their trust in them for one election
only, perhaps, because they were
sceptical of
sceptical ofJeremy Corbyn I didn’t
sceptical of jeremy Corbyn I didn’t
think he
sceptical ofJeremy Corbyn I didn’t
think he was credible, so
think he was credible, sol
sceptical ofJeremy Corbyn I didn’t
think he was credible, so I think
the policy platform will shift
dramatically in keeping with the
realignment of politics which is
realignment of politic which is
taking
realignment of politics which is
taking place, so I would expect a
plan to pump money into big
infrastructure projects and the NHS,
infrastmclure projects and the NHS,
and
infrastructure projects and the NHS,
and there has been suggestion of
them are using the new found freedom
of Brexit not to potentially
liberalise the economy but instead
to bypass EU rules state aid to help
to bypass EU mles state aid to help
PWP “P
prop up ailing
to bypass EU rules state aid to help
prop up ailing businesses. There has
been a myth on the left, and we
sought during the election, that
Boris
BorisJohnson is some kind of neo—
Thatcherite figure, and I don’t
think there is evidence for that. I
think he is much closer to a Michael
Heseltine that happens to disagree
with Heseltine on the EU. Yes, the
man here. I think we can expect more
man here. I think we ran expect more
of the same, if
man here. I think we can expect more
of the same, if not worse. The
majority that
majority thatJohnson has got...
APPLAUSE
APPMUSE
I
APPLAUSE
I think he will exploit it. We have
seen already in Liverpool that the
government has rejected the renewal
of a licensing scheme to do with
tenancies. I think a lot of people
tenancies. I think a lot of peopla
will see
tenancies. I think a lot of people
will see what the Tories stand for,
and that is a bent and isolation not
just of Liverpool but the whole of
the law. --
the law. —— abandonment and
the law. -- abandonment and
isolation.
the law. —— abandonment and
isolation. If anybody believes
johnson
Johnson and his mantra of supporting
johnson and his mantra of supporting
the north, I
Johnson and his mantra of supporting
the north, I think they are
misguided.
APPLAUSE
You, sir, in the T-shirt. First of
all, Shami
You, sir, in the T—shirt. First of
all, Shami Chakrabarti just used the
word entitlement, and as a baroness
she would know, wouldn’t she? In
terms of Boris
terms of Borisjohnson, for me, I
terms of Boris johnson, for me, I
think, you know,
terms of Borisjohnson, for me, I
think, you know, his
terms of BorisJohnson, for me, I
think, you know, his outlook is sort
of.
of, you know, hand up, yeah, not
think, you know, his outlook is sort
of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota
hand-out. For
hand—out. Forfar
of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota
hand—out. Forfartoo
hand—out. For far too long,
of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota
hand—out. Forfar too long, this
hand-out. For far too long, this
country has
hand—out. Forfar too long, this
country has relied on sort of, you
know, supporting individuals, you
know, rather
know, ratherthan
know, supporting individuals, you
know, rather than enabling them to
get on in life, yeah, and I think we
need to look at moving forward from
that. And the woman here in the
green cardigan. Is the government
going to redirect some of your money
“P
up to our great northern cities and
let us take care of our own affairs?
let us take rare of our own affairs?
Well, Helan,
let us take care of our own affairs?
Well, Helen, let me put in some
Well, Helan, let me put in some
context.
Well, Helen, let me put in some
context. Since 2010, real
context. Since 2010, realterm
context. Since 2010, real term
funding from
context. Since 2010, realterm
funding from central government to
Liverpool City Council has been cut
by 5395, is
by 63%, is quite a lot. Several
by 6396, is quite a lot. Several
hundred
by 63%, is quite a lot. Several
hundred million, I
hundred million, Ithink. So what
by 63%, is quite a lot. Several
hundred million, I think. 50 what is
hundred million, Ithink. So what is
the Tory
hundred million, I think. 50 what is
the Tory government going to do for
cities like Liverpool? Well, the
first thing that might provide you
with some reassurance is that this
is my second visit to Liverpool
within a week. They want more than
visits! I mean, that’s lovely...
APPLAUSE
Something to actually happen! Your
time is limited, and I think it was
my first visit since the election
my first visit since the elaction
and I
my first visit since the election
and I chose it to be to Liverpool,
because it is important step someone
just shouted out, do you need a map?
of
Of my own view unlivable is it’s a
fantastic city, and had a fantastic
visit last Friday. —— my own view of
visit last Friday. -- my own view of
Liverpool. There
visit last Friday. —— my own view of
Liverpool. There are really exciting
things ahead for Liverpool. I wish
the lady who asked the question
could feel a bit of excitement that
I feel at the moment as we embark on
a new decade, that this is going to
be a fantastic decade for our
country. It’s a fantastic moment of
renewal.
SOME LAUGHTER IN AUDIENCE.
SOME MUGHTER IN AUDIENCE.
It’s
SOME LAUGHTER IN AUDIENCE.
It’s a moment to get excited and
grasp the opportunity to stop the
honour in a to invest and we are
determined to invest in
infrastructure, and significant
infrastructure, and significa nt
direction
infrastructure, and significant
direction of travel travel for that
is new infrastructure connecting the
is new infrastmcture connecting the
north cities,
is new infrastructure connecting the
north cities, so you can get between
north cities, so you ran get between
them and get
north cities, so you can get between
them and get some of the benefits of
being like one larger sister, so we
will be investing in infrastructure
will be investing in infrastmclure
and public
will be investing in infrastructure
and public services. We know the NHS
is stmggling
is struggling with the level of
demand and we were put in an
increase of funding of £34 billion.
We will invest in schools. We are
doing fantastic stuff for the
country and making sure there is
more money in your pocket. 50
more money in your pocket. So let’s
get excited about it! There is quite
a lot of laughter. I mean, there are
a lot of people in this audience who
voted Conservative, but there are
dearty
clearly people here who voted
Labour. They are laughing, and not
very excited. Give the people here
one thing that they can get excited
one thing that they ran get excited
about, say,
one thing that they can get excited
about, say, OK, the Conservatives
are in government, this is one thing
to watch for. If you are somebody on
a lower income, we are determined
that your income will go up. For
instance, we are increasing the
national living wage, which will be
over £10 an hour in this Parliament,
over £10 an hour in this Partiament,
and we are raising
over £10 an hour in this Parliament,
and we are raising the threshold on
national insurance, so it’s about
having more money in your pocket,
and that goes hand in hand with our
strong record on
strong record onjobs, so you are
strong record on jobs, so you are
more likely to
strong record onjobs, so you are
more likely to be in a job, earning
more and having more money in your
pocket. Isn’t that a good thing? The
woman in the blacktop. I appreciate
your comments on the national
infrastructure and the national
infrastmclure and the national
living wage,
infrastructure and the national
living wage, but with two thirds of
children under the poverty line, why
are you not helping the actual
peopla why
people why not make a difference in
peoples lives? We can build more
peoplas lives? We ran build more
student
peoples lives? We can build more
student accommodation at a wonderful
things on the docks but, if people
things on the docks but, if peopla
can’t
things on the docks but, if people
can’t afford to eat, these are the
important things in our country, in
my opinion. The woman at the top
with the long hair. Talking about
transport and things, I have been
travelling from Manchester to
Liverpool since December last year
and I can’t tell you the amount of
overcrowding on those trains, and I
just think I can’t believe these are
two massive cities in the north—west
two massive cities in the north-west
and they are not
two massive cities in the north—west
and they are not well linked, and
that means to change. Tonga I agree,
the connections are not good enough.
That is why we need to do that and
invest. Whatever schemes, the
ambition to connect up the cities of
the north, including Liverpool to
Manchester, absolutely. I would love
Manchester, absolutely. Iwould love
to see
Manchester, absolutely. I would love
to see that change, but it doesn’t
seem to be happening. It doesn’t
happen overnight, but you absolutely
have to do it. I don’t want to go
back over old ground, but the
finances of the country were not in
such a good state ten years ago, but
now we ran
now we can invest in infrastructure.
now we ran invest in infrastmclure.
It’s bad, it’s got
now we can invest in infrastructure.
It’s bad, it’s got to get better,
absolutely. Plan to look at what is
your view,
yourview, Laurence
your view, Laurence there have been
your view, laurence there have been
many news
your view, Laurence there have been
many news items about the state of
the railways, but in terms of what
the north can expect from a
Conservative government? I am not a
politician but I don’t at all
resonate with what he said
Liverpudlians being victims. I’ve
worked here a couple of times and,
like most cities in the north, you
are so much nicer received by much
nicer people than you ever bump into
nicer peopla than you ever bump into
in London
nicer people than you ever bump into
in London ever.
APPLAUSE
Alyn
Alyn. I think the question went to
the character of Boris
the character of BorisJohnson. The
the character of Boris johnson. The
words printed
the character of BorisJohnson. The
words printed in his newspaper,
which he refused to apologise for
when Angela Eagle much more recently
when Angela Eagla much more recently
asked
when Angela Eagle much more recently
asked him
when Angela Eagla much more recently
asked him to,
when Angela Eagle much more recently
asked him to, were gratuitously
offensive, and he dismisses it as
banter. This is the man who said on
the 31st October he’d rather die in
a ditch and failed to deliver
Brexit, and then he was
Brexit, and then he wasjust
a ditch and failed to deliver
Brexit, and then he was just having
a laugh. My position of Boris
johnson is
Johnson is that the Tories are led
johnson is that the Tories are lad
by somebody
Johnson is that the Tories are led
by somebody who I think is unfit for
pub“:
public office. And, worse than that,
it’s because this is a man who will
say anything and promise anything,
and I think we need to
and I think we need tojudge this
and I think we need to judge this
government
and I think we need tojudge this
government by its deeds, and I think
politicians of all stripes need to
work together to do our best to
mitigate what I think this
government will do, because I think
there is bad stuff coming down the
line, not least coming through with
Brexit. You have had your hand up
for a long time, sir. If you are
wondering about the cynicism, it’s
because Liverpool was the hardest
hit and it came to central funding
cuts to local government, and it has
devastated the city, in many
respects, particularly those who are
respects, particularty those who are
most
respects, particularly those who are
most vulnerable. I will believe the
good when I see it, simple as that.
APPLAUSE
Let’s have another question from Ian
Stuart. Yes. Which Labour candidate,
Stuart. Yes. which labour candidate,
if any, do you
Stuart. Yes. Which Labour candidate,
if any, do you feel could reconnect
with the lost voters in the north?
I’m going to start with Madeline
I’m going to start with Madeline.
From what I’ve seen, I am not
convinced any of them understand the
stale
scale of the problem they are facing
and the amount of trust that needs
to be rebuilt in seats that, I
think, for a long time many Labour
think, for a long time many labour
politicians took
think, for a long time many Labour
politicians took for granted and
thought they could count on for
ever, and they essentially own to
these people and they belonged them.
I mean, listening to even Lisa
Mandy, who I
Nandy, who I have a lot of respect
Mandy, who I have a lot of respect
for, and I
Nandy, who I have a lot of respect
for, and I think she is absolutely
right when she said that, before
doing gimmicky projects like HSZ, we
could get the bloody bus routes are
sorted, I think she’s right about
that, but she is continuing to
maintain the party’s exact line on
the issue of free movement, despite
the issue offree movement, despite
the fact it
the issue of free movement, despite
the fact it is clear that a large
proportion of the electorate,
including in the red wall,
including in the red well, does not
including in the red wall, does not
share
including in the red well, does not
share that opinion. Meanwhile, you
have Rebecca Long—Bailey, the air to
have Rebeca Long-Bailey, the air to
jeremy Corbyn,
have Rebecca Long—Bailey, the air to
Jeremy Corbyn, when asked in an
jeremy Corbyn, when asked in an
interview
Jeremy Corbyn, when asked in an
interview will she thought he had
performed as Labour leader, she said
performed as labour leader, she said
he was ten
performed as Labour leader, she said
he was ten out of ten, and you
really wonder what you’d have to do
to be eight in those circumstances.
I don’t think they understand the
stale
scale of the problem until they have
that profound conversation with
themselves as a party, and I don’t
think they will get anywhere.
APPLAUSE
Shami
Shami, who do you back as the next
labour
Labour leader? A gentleman earlier
labour leader? A gentleman eartier
said, she is
Labour leader? A gentleman earlier
said, she is an unelected baroness
said, she is an unelacted baroness
and she is
said, she is an unelected baroness
and she is entitled, and he’s got a
and she is entitlad, and he’s got a
point, and I am
and she is entitled, and he’s got a
point, and I am not entitled, which
point, and lam not entitlad, which
is why I don’t
point, and I am not entitled, which
is why I don’t think it’s my place
to publicly declare for any one of
these elected people. But we are so
interested in what got to say! You
were so close to the heart of the
previous government. Sorry, the
previous opposition. These are five
"TY
very strong candidates. Could you
narrow that down a bit? I will come
back to the question on reconnecting
people in the north, but I have
decided I don’t think it’s
appropriate for me to come out and,
by the way, it would probably be the
kiss of death for any one of the
candidates if I did! In our rules,
candidates if I did! In our mles,
there is a
candidates if I did! In our rules,
there is a role for MP5 to
declare... But that’s the heart of
the question, in terms of
reconnecting the lost voters of the
north, what do you think comedy must
have opinions, Labour needs to do to
have opinions, labour needs to do to
reconnect
have opinions, Labour needs to do to
reconnect with those photos?
You have to start by listening and I
know that all the candidates will be
using this period to travel, just
like Helen, they can get on the
like Helen, they ran get on the
train and
like Helen, they can get on the
train and they can come to Liverpool
train and they ran come to Liverpool
and they ran go
train and they can come to Liverpool
and they can go elsewhere and they
and they ran go elsewhere and they
do spend a lot
and they can go elsewhere and they
do spend a lot of time... And some
of the candidates are from the
north. Someone up there a scion,
thinking, when the trains are
mnning!
running! Forgive me, but
thinking, when the trains are
running! Forgive me, butl
running! Forgive me, but I really do
mnning! Forgive me, butl really do
think that. . .
running! Forgive me, but I really do
think that... And if Boris
think that... And if BorisJohnson
think that... And if Boris johnson
is going to
think that... And if BorisJohnson
is going to steal some of our
clothes and be a one—nation
Conservative, he could consider
renationalising the railways,
actually, because I actually believe
that is a very popular policy.
that is a very popular policy. Let’s
just get a microphone to you. They
need to realise that Labour suffered
need to realise that labour suffered
their
need to realise that Labour suffered
their worst election result since
1935, and the arrogant and
condescending attitude and no shift
in ideas and manifestoes will cost
you elections for decades to come.
you elections for decades to come. I
am actually trying very hard not to
be arrogant, I don’t feel arrogant
about that defeat, I really don’t, I
feel... Your attitude tonight, and
when you describe Boris
when you describe Borisjohnson,
when you describe Boris johnson,
peopla are
when you describe Borisjohnson,
people are entitled to their own
peopla are entitiad to their own
opinions,
people are entitled to their own
opinions, and people have their
opinions, and peopla have their
history, if we
opinions, and people have their
history, if we quoted what you
believed in in 2004, or the SNP, you
could be held to account. You need
to listen to the electorate. The
electorate did not get it wrong.
Well, I
Well, lam
electorate did not get it wrong.
Well, I am a democrat... You didn’t!
Forgive me, sir, but
Forgive me, sir, butl
Well, I am a democrat... You didn’t!
Forgive me, sir, but I think I am
entitled to
entiﬂad to say
Forgive me, sir, but I think I am
entitled to say that Boris
entitled to say that BorisJohnson’s
entiﬂad to say that Boris johnson’s
remarks
entitled to say that BorisJohnson’s
remarks about Liverpool, about
Muslim, about black people, and it
Muslim, about black peopla, and it
goes on...
APPLAUSE AND CHEERING.
Forgive me. So, I think the
candidates will all be listening,
everybody was devastated by the
result, I don’t think it was because
of railway nationalisation, I
believe that that was a very popular
policy when I was knocking on doors.
There are other issues. We were in a
really difficult position on Brexit,
our members and voters were split on
Brexit. I know that our position of
trying to bring these two sides
together did not work. And it was a
Brexit election. Of course it wasn’t
Brexit elaction. Of course it wasn’t
the only issue, I
Brexit election. Of course it wasn’t
the only issue, I do appreciate
that, but it was a very, very big
issue in the Brexit election and all
the media were calling it the Brexit
election and we didn’t manage to
make it about other issues. But, of
course, we lost, and we lost very
badly, we have to listen, I believe
all of the candidates will listen,
and it will be for them, one of
them, to lead us back to government.
That sounded so plaintive. What am I
That sounded so plaintive. what am I
going to... ?
going to...? I
That sounded so plaintive. what am I
going to...? lam
That sounded so plaintive. What am I
going to...? I am either arrogant or
I am
Iam plaintive! No,
going to...? I am either arrogant or
lam plaintive! No, no, no, I’m not
trying to give you a hard time, it
just sounded so very melancholy. Can
just sounded so very melancholy. (“an
I
Ijust
just sounded so very melancholy. (“an
I just say that
just sounded so very melancholy. Can
I just say that politics is a
Ijust say that politics is a tough
I just say that politic is a tough
sis
gig and we
Ijust say that politics is a tough
gig and we are all here to represent
all parties, we are not
representative of everything all
parties say and I think Shami
deserves a lot of credit. I am
neutral in the Labour Party
neutral in the labour Party
leadership
neutral in the Labour Party
leadership contest, I think you
should ask a Scottish Labour Party
should ask a Scottish labour Party
politician,
should ask a Scottish Labour Party
politician, although to be far,
there are not many of them around
any
any. The point about reconnecting
with the voters is absolutely right.
The Labour Party in Scotland took
The labour Party in Scotland took
peopla for
The Labour Party in Scotland took
people for granted, and lost touch.
peopla for granted, and lost touch.
That is why my
people for granted, and lost touch.
That is why my party in the last
election, where I was
election, where I wasjust
That is why my party in the last
election, where I was just elected
election, where I was just eluted
into
election, where I was just elected
into Westminster, the Labour Party
into Westminster, the labour Party
only has one
into Westminster, the Labour Party
only has one seat in the whole of
Scotland. That’s how quickly this
stuff can change. In northern
stuff ran change. In northern
England, I
stuff can change. In northern
England, I studied at Leeds
University, I know the north of
England pretty well, you are the
right end of England, after all, for
me. And Liverpool, I
me. And Liverpool, lam basically at
home. But a lot of people voted Tory
home. But a lot of peopla voted Tory
not
home. But a lot of people voted Tory
not because they wanted to vote Tory
and voted in spite of Boris
and voted in spite of Borisjohnson,
and voted in spite of Boris johnson,
but they voted
and voted in spite of Borisjohnson,
but they voted out of sheer
frustration with the shambles that
fmstration with the shambles that
the
frustration with the shambles that
the Labour Party has become under
the labour Party has become under
jeremy Corbyn.
the Labour Party has become under
Jeremy Corbyn. As a friend of
jeremy Corbyn. As a friend of
England and
Jeremy Corbyn. As a friend of
England and a progressive
politician, I really want to see the
labour Party
Labour Party get its act together.
labour Party get its act together.
I’ve got good
Labour Party get its act together.
I’ve got good friends in the Labour
I’ve got good friends in the labour
Party who
I’ve got good friends in the Labour
Party who having a really tough
time, and this Labour Party election
time, and this labour Party elaction
is going to be
time, and this Labour Party election
is going to be really important and
I really do hope they make the right
choice. Half a million members,
forgive me, and one of the biggest
if not the biggest political
movements in Western Europe is not
quite a shambles, forgive me. I was
being nice to you. Laurence, which
labour
Labour candidate do you believe
labour candidate do you believe
should
Labour candidate do you believe
should best represent the voters of
the North? Keir Starmer? Why? He
the North? Keir Starmer? why? He
just looks like
the North? Keir Starmer? Why? He
just looks like he can take Boris on
just looks like he ran take Boris on
quite well, do
just looks like he can take Boris on
quite well, do you know what I mean?
You don’t think any of the four
women would be...? Oh, it’s not
about women, jeepers, creepers. I am
about women, jeepers, creepers. lam
just interested in
about women, jeepers, creepers. I am
just interested in your view. Any
woman... Because it’s really
important what gender you are or sex
you are rather than what your
policies are and how you approach
politic. I
politics. I think what Shami said is
politic. I think what Shami said is
also part of
politics. I think what Shami said is
also part of the problem which is
going on in the Labour Party, so
going on in the labour Party, so
many of the
going on in the Labour Party, so
many of the candidates have made
reference to their identity, people
are fed up with identity politics
are fed up with identity politic
but they
are fed up with identity politics
but they keep talking about how
cmmmy
crummy their school was, what their
cmmmy their school was, what their
gender is, at
crummy their school was, what their
gender is, et cetera, and even at
the last general election, Jo
Swinson made her gender
Swinson made her genderfront and
Swinson made her gender front and
centre of
Swinson made her genderfront and
centre of the Lib Dems campaign and
she even implied that the reason she
was being restricted from the
leadership debates wasn’t that it
was in the obvious political
interest of her opponents, but
because they were obviously sexist.
The
berause they were obviously sexist.
The public
because they were obviously sexist.
The public disagreed with that view.
I think if they keep zoning in words
on identity characteristics, what
on identity characteristic, what
happened
on identity characteristics, what
happened with Jeremy
happened withJeremy Corbyn, if you
happened with jeremy Corbyn, if you
look at
happened withJeremy Corbyn, if you
look at the polling, the public
actually agrees with many key
plaques of his policy platform but
they didn’t vote for him because
they did not think he was competent.
I think they want a competent
leader, it is that simple. Which
leader, it is that simple. which
labour
leader, it is that simple. Which
Labour leader would you least like
labour leader would you least like
to see? I
Labour leader would you least like
to see? I mean, it is up to Labour
to see? I mean, it is up to labour
to choose
to see? I mean, it is up to Labour
to choose their own leader and I do
not want to say anything that would
inﬂuence,
influence, saying who I think is
inﬂuence, saying who I think is
best or
influence, saying who I think is
best or worst. I guess my overall
view on what I would hope the future
labour
Labour leader should do, and I think
labour leader should do, and I think
it is really
Labour leader should do, and I think
it is really important that we have
a really strong opposition in the
country, is, firstly, listen to
peopla,
people, listen to people. Don’t be
peopla, listen to peopla. Don’t be
so ideological,
people, listen to people. Don’t be
so ideological, listen to people,
realise that lots of people wanted
Brexit, get that. Lots of people
Brexit, get that. Lots of peopla
don’t
Brexit, get that. Lots of people
don’t want higher taxes, appreciate
people want to keep money in their
pockets. People want opportunities,
and stop talking Britain down and
start talking Britain up. She’s do
we have got very little time left
but I want to get one question in
that a fair
that a fairfew
but I want to get one question in
that a fair few people wanted to ask
that a fair few peopla wanted to ask
about. Is
that a fair few people wanted to ask
about. Is it coincidental that after
the worst figures of recent years
regarding the four hour A&E waiting
regarding the four hour AaE waiting
targets has
regarding the four hour A&E waiting
targets has been published this week
at the same time as the government
is talking about scrapping the
target? These are A&E waiting
target? These are AaE waiting
targets in
target? These are A&E waiting
targets in England, the worst
figures on record. We haven’t got
much time but I think it is
important. The government is hinting
at scrapping the four hour target.
What
what is going
at scrapping the four hour target.
What is going to happen? I know it
what is going to happen? I know it
has been
What is going to happen? I know it
has been really tough in A&E in
has been really tough in “IE in
winter in
has been really tough in A&E in
winter in the NHS, tough for staff
in the NHS, and as always, thank you
to all the NHS staff who are
sticking with it and working so
hard. I think that the review of the
waiting time target wasn’t suggested
quite a while ago and I think it has
been around, it is not suddenly now.
I think there is a view overall on
targets, and I have it from having
worked in quite a few hospitals
before I was an MP, that a box
ticking target culture isn’t
helpful. Accountability and
transparency is important. 50, it is
transparency is important. So, it is
important to be
transparency is important. 50, it is
important to be measuring stuff and
reporting on it and measuring it in
the right way, but to do it in a way
that is best for patients, is the
“Y
way forward, not to do what seems to
get the best headlines, but to do
what is best for patients. Not
because it is embarrassing for the
government after ten years? No, it
is not a sudden thing to be looking
at the A&E target. I absolutely
at the “IE target. I absolutely
recognise
at the A&E target. I absolutely
recognise the pressures on the NHS,
the important thing is that it is
getting a really huge,
record—breaking, increase in
investment, £34 billion per year
investment, 54 billion per year
extra
investment, £34 billion per year
extra will
investment, 54 billion per year
extra will go
investment, £34 billion per year
extra will go into it. We’re going
to have more nurses, more doctors,
new hospitals, we are going to
really invest in it and make use of
having a strong economy to do that.
The question is about English A&E
The question is about English “IE
figures, I
The question is about English A&E
figures, I would say that we are in
charge of the NHS in Scotland and
Scotland’s A&E has outperformed all
countries of the UK in the last four
years. The last time they hit the
95%
9596 target
years. The last time they hit the
95% target was in 2017. We have
outperformed the other countries.
So, not brilliantly but perhaps not
quite as badly? There are lots of
things we need to do better,
absolutely. But the point I would be
making is that I don’t trust the
Tories on the NHS.
Tories on the NHS. Shami, do you
think the four hour target should be
scrapped? Of course not, and for the
reason that Helen gave, you want
accountability and transparency, you
don’t say we didn’t meet the target,
we abolish the target country I was
told, quite rightly, don’t talk
Britain down. One of the best things
about Britain, envied all over the
world, has been the NHS. One of the
best thing is that Labour ever did
best thing is that labour ever did
in its
best thing is that Labour ever did
in its 100—odd years. And I think
in its 100-odd years. And I think
that four
in its 100—odd years. And I think
that four ours is a very long time
to be a sick person. Sometimes
people have been queueing outside
A&Fs in
A&Es in the cold, in the winter,
Aan in the cold, in the winter,
that is
A&Es in the cold, in the winter,
that is completely unacceptable in
one of the wealthiest countries on
earth. And Helen, I urge you,
please, don’t scrap the targets,
don’t scrap the transparency and
accountability and let’s get behind
the NHS. I didn’t suggest for a
moment that we should scrap
transparency and accountability.
Under a Conservative government, we
have made huge strides, absolutely
committed to transparency and
accountability, but let’s do it in a
“Y
way that results in the best care
way that results in the best rare
for patients.
way that results in the best care
for patients. But today, all the
practitioners have been crying out
and saying otherwise, they have been
saying how terrible it would be to
scrap these targets.
scrap these targets. Labour have
scrap these targets. labour have
planned to
scrap these targets. Labour have
planned to scrap Ofsted and other
forms of target gathering in
education, so
education, sol
forms of target gathering in
education, so I think it goes both
ways. But we heard about a winter
crisis, travelling abroad, it is so
rare to hear other countries in a
perpetual winter crisis. This has
been happening to the NHS for
decades. I think we can and should
decades. I think we ran and should
spend much
decades. I think we can and should
spend much more on the NHS and I
think funding is part of the
solution. But I also think that
given we are wedded to a highly
centralised, top—down model which
centralised, top-down model which
has been
centralised, top—down model which
has been in place since
has been in place since1948, we
has been in place since 1948, we
should
has been in place since1948, we
should also take a look at best
practice abroad. The dysfunctional
American system isn’t... It is not
the only game in town, we should
look at what works in Europe, where
they manage things very differently
and they certainly are not living in
perpetual winter crisis mode.
Laurence? As somebody very close to
me has just been
me hasjust been in A&E, on the E
me has just been in “IE, on the E
end of it, and
me hasjust been in A&E, on the E
end of it, and they were treated
straightaway, and absolutely
wonderfully, so
wonderfully, sol
straightaway, and absolutely
wonderfully, so I am very grateful
for the NHS. Well, an accident can
for the NHS. Well, an accident ran
be an
for the NHS. Well, an accident can
be an emergency lamp or it can be, I
be an emergency lamp or it ran be, I
don’t know. Keep
be an emergency lamp or it can be, I
don’t know. Keep targets, why not.
But I think the NHS when you really
need them is incredible. I
need them is incredible. Ijust
wanted a quick follow—up to say that
wanted a quick follow-up to say that
you haven’t
wanted a quick follow—up to say that
you haven’t mentioned social care,
you haven’t mentioned social rare,
and the
you haven’t mentioned social care,
and the situation in A&E will never
and the situation in “IE will never
get better
and the situation in A&E will never
get better until you sort out social
rare. And
care. And there is no indication to
rare. And there is no indication to
rasuals
care. And there is no indication to
casuals that you have any plan, it
rasuals that you have any plan, it
is just a wish.
casuals that you have any plan, it
is just a wish. But you have got to
do that. When are we going to see
do that. when are we going to see
something on
do that. When are we going to see
something on social care, Boris
something on social rare, Boris
johnson said
something on social care, Boris
Johnson said this year? He did
johnson said this year? He did
indeed say
Johnson said this year? He did
indeed say this year and you are
absolutely right because when you’ve
got people in hospital who are
got peopla in hospital who are
actually
got people in hospital who are
actually better being somewhere
else, so that hospitals can treat
else, so that hospitals ran treat
people who
else, so that hospitals can treat
people who need to be in hospital,
peopla who need to be in hospital,
that
people who need to be in hospital,
that would be much better
that would be much betterfor the
that would be much better for the
NHS and
that would be much betterfor the
NHS and much better
NHS and much betterfor the patient.
NHS and much better for the patient.
Its words,
NHS and much betterfor the patient.
Its words, though, isn’t it? Well, I
mean, the point is that we need
to... We had a consensus in the
1940s about a national commitment to
19405 about a national commitment to
the NHS. We need to have that kind
of consensus around a commitment on
social rare.
social care. And social care must be
social rare. And social rare must be
properly
property funded
social care. And social care must be
properly funded and recognised, that
property funded and recognised, that
raring for
properly funded and recognised, that
caring for people is really, really
raring for peopla is really, really
important.
caring for people is really, really
important. 0K, we
important. 0K, we could keep going,
but our hour is up, I am so sorry,
so many of you have got your hands
up. Let me remind you, next week we
are in Stoke Newington in North
London and the following week we are
in the Derbyshire Spa of Buxton.
(“all us
Callus on... If you would like to
(“all us on... If you would like to
come along. Or
Callus on... If you would like to
come along. Or go to the Question
Time website and follow the
instructions. If you want to have
your say on tonight’s topics, you
your say on tonight’s topic, you
ran join Adrian
your say on tonight’s topics, you
canjoin Adrian Chiles
can join Adrian Chiles and guests on
ran join Adrian Chiles and guests on
Question
can join Adrian Chiles and guests on
Question Time extra time, which is
on Radio 5 Live right now. For now,
thank you very much to the panel,
and to the audience, and thank you
to you at home for watching and
listening. From Liverpool, goodbye.
It’s you!
Of course it’s me.
Stand and finish your story.
# Lust for life...
I will tear your world to pieces
and I will drink my fill.
# Lust for life...
He is a monster.
He is the Devil himself.
# Got a lust for life... #
I’m very careful with what I eat.
Me too.
All you have to do...
..is let me in.
WHISPERED CHANTING
You’ve been warned before.
Grandma’s knickers.
WHISTLE BLOWS
Unfortunately, she was
a ﬂexitarian vegan cannibal.
All bets are off.
Brexitcast from the BBC.
No one’s got a BLEEP
clue what Brexit is.
Brexit is, er...
I hadn’t quite understood
the full extent of this.
We are particularly reliant
on the Dover—Calais crossing.
This election blew away the argument
for a second referendum.
I urge everyone to find closure.
Let the healing begin.
I’m sorry, we will miss you.
A process which I can only
describe as a dog’s Brexit.
This is Katya in Brussels.
And Adam in Brussels.
I’m Laura in Westminster.
And Chris in Westminster.
I think it’s fair to say, picking up
on where we were last week,
compared to where it was,
the news has lost some
of its capacity to excite,
but there is still stuff we can get
into, if we return to our Brexitcast
tradition of delighting
in the nuance and detail.
Sure, stuff has been happening,
and huge news in other parts
of the news landscape,
but from your end, guys,
although he said it in London,
I think, there was something quite
familiar but important from one
of the people who will really matter
in the next 12 months.
This is Phil Hogan.
Known as big Phil.
Is he?!
He is super tell, about six
foot six, very tall.
He has other attributes,
he is Irish, he was the Agriculture
Commissioner in the last commission
and now he is the Trade
Commissioner.
He is a big character,
pretty forceful.
Yes, and he’s now Trade Commissioner
so will be involved in the trade
negotiations with the UK,
I think, but not exactly clear.
He was in America doing an interview
with Peter Mandelson
at a conference in London over,
like, a Facetime,
Skypey kind of thing.
He was in the States to try
and smooth over trade tensions
between the US and EU,
but yes, he took part in this live
debate and took questions,
including some questions on Brexit.
What did we find out,
not that we’ve heard any of this
in the last few weeks,
about the likelihood
of a comprehensive trade deal
in place and ratified by the end
of the year?
Let’s listen.
Prime MinisterJohnson I think
unwisely decided he wants a deadline
again, he wants a timeline,
putting enormous pressure on the UK